foreign
welcome thank you so much for being here
well it's a real pleasure to be here
Katie thank you very much
well I'm excited this is a topic I have
not gotten to tackle very much on this
podcast and I think as the statistics
well illustrate it's one that
increasingly affects everyone at least
in in the form of someone we know has
had an experience with cancer and I
think maybe to start off Broad and
foundational it sounds like a simple
question but I would love for you to
walk us through from your side what is
cancer because like I said we've all
heard of it we've probably had a loved
one who's experienced it but I think
most people have maybe only a very
surface level passing understanding of
what cancer actually is and what's going
on and maybe most people think it's just
genetic so walk us through the
foundational what is cancer to begin
with yeah well thanks the the definition
is simply
cell division out of control
dysregulated cell growth
that could happen in any population of
cells in any particular organ
so that's the simplest definition of
cancer just cells that are no longer
under uh a regulated uh growth control
and you have uh cells that grow out out
of control and
um what we and others especially Otto
Warburg found that this is due largely
to A disruption of their ability to
generate energy through uh oxygen in
other words most of our cells in the
body are under regulated control
uh because uh we we have a very
efficient oxygen system in all of our
our cells we we breathe air into our
body and we produce energy in a highly
highly efficient way
and the organelle inside of our cells
called the mitochondrion uh it's
actually a network of organelles
controls the energy metabolism in the
cell and when that organelle becomes
damaged from any number of provocative
agents cells lose their ability to
remain differentiated or quiescent and
they start to grow in a disregulated way
so
um and they continue to grow and they
disturb the micro environment creating a
variety of of problems and uh they can
spread uh eventually they can spread and
uh the mechanism we've defined the
mechanism and the cells that do that so
we we pretty much know what the
metastatic cancer cell is metastatic is
the spreading ultimately that becomes
your most serious consequence of cancer
is when these cells begin to invade uh
local uh areas and then get into the
bloodstream and spread around the body
and that then represents a significant
health hazard to the patient but we've
defined all of these processes at the
biological and biochemistry level and
we're pretty clear as to what the whole
process involves and also how to effect
effectively manage this whole process
and like I said I think this is a
different way of looking at it than
perhaps a lot of people have considered
and I have definitely talked to people
who's understanding or they've been told
by doctors even is oh cancer is just
genetic nothing really impacts whether
you get it or you don't it's just in
your genes where it's not and you
mentioned the Warburg study can you go a
little bit deeper on explaining what
that one is for people who aren't
familiar with it yeah well Otto Warburg
was
um a German scientist uh one of the
dominant biochemists
from the 20th century
um as a matter of fact Sam Apple just
wrote a book ravenous on the history of
Otto Warburg
um and how powerful and influential he
was he clearly uh defined the origin of
cancer as a disease of respiration as a
disorder of respiration which means the
cells can't get energy by by oxygen they
start to ferment which is an ancient
pathway we have we have confirmed Otto
warburg's findings
um and further and further them so
basically when a cell can no longer if
if if we the fastest way to know this
it's terrible to say but if people drink
cyanide they die instantly or very close
within a minute it's because uh oxygen
energy has been shut down to all cells
in the body
cancer cells can live in cyan I think so
clearly cyanide does not kill a tumor
cell if you had an animal or a person
with a big tumor and that animal or
person were to drink cyanide the the
animal and the person would die
instantly but the tumor cells would
remain alive and that's because they
don't use oxygen for energy so Warburg
showed this many many years ago
and then but and as he said if if the if
the um oxygen oxygen consumption or use
of oxygen for energy becomes corrupted
too acutely the cell could will die so
you can never get a cancer cell from a
dead Cell It's The Chronic Interruption
over time that allows the cell to
transfer energy Metabolism from
breathing oxygen to affirmative ancient
fermentation pathway and that's the
that's the key it's the replacement of
of oxygen energy with fermentation
energy
so uh and that's what Warburg said and
um unfortunately his
his
um at that time they didn't have enough
information that we now have because
because
um orberg himself and other scientists
showed that that when you take these
cancer cells and grow them in in a
culture dish they take in oxygen so
everybody was confused how could How
could a cancer cell or Warburg say that
that replacement is the replacement of
of oxygen for energy and yet these
cancer cells were still taking in oxygen
and we have found that the oxygen that
the cancer cell consumes is not used for
energy so this is the real breakthrough
in other words thousands of chemists are
biologists and oncologists say Warburg
was wrong because cancer cells continue
to consume oxygen what we and others
have found is that oxygen consumption is
not used for energy it's actually used
for these producing of these reactive
oxygen species which are are radicals
and they damage DNA and they cause
mutations so the cancer cell collects
mutations as an effect a downstream
effect of the damage to the respiration
so the fermentation is now what's the
driver of the cancer cell so the cancer
cells and when you say well what's
fermentation well that's energy without
oxygen well what kind of fuel can a cell
how can a cell get energy without what
are the fuels and there's only two that
we have we've interrogated these cancer
cells and it's the blue sugar glucose
and the amino acid glutamine an amino
acid glutamine so the two fuels are both
fermentable and they can't we have not
yet found any cancer cell that can live
without the glucose and the glutamine
so the solution to the cancer problem is
a very simple one target the glucose and
glutamine simultaneously while
transitioning the whole body off to a
fuel that the cancer cell can't use
which are Ketone bodies
so this is the uh the strategy the the
outline for managing all can they all
the all these cancers are very much the
same this is another misinformation is
that people think breast cancer is
different from brain cancer is different
from colon cancer different no no no
they all fermenters so in other words
one single approach can manage the
majority of cancers that people have
period
which in and of itself is exciting
because I think that you're right the
story seems to make it sound like these
are each so nuanced and complicated and
have to be treated differently and
there's these long treatment protocols
depending on the type of cancer
um and also just to Circle back on the
genetic side and finally hopefully put a
nail in that and dispel that myth when
people think well cancer is just as
genetic my response has always been well
our genes are not changing rapidly so if
that were the case why would cancer
rates be rising so drastically and what
are the rates we're seeing a definite
rise kind of across the board in cancers
right
well some cancers are rising much faster
than others especially breast cancer
breast cancer has now replaced heart
disease as the number one killer of
women
so that's just that's new so they're not
making any major progress
um on this type of cancer brain cancers
pancreatic cancers bladder cancers you
know these lung cancers they've always
been the biggest the biggest reduction
in cancer over the last uh four decades
has been the cessation of smoking
um so that makes it look like we're
making the of advantage in cancer but
it's actually a it's actually stopping
the smoking which was linked to all
kinds of cancers so most members of our
society are smoking less and then it
looks like oh the cancer rate is going
down but the number of dead people
accumulating every year from cancer goes
up you know this is one of the great uh
misinformations that that come out that
oh we're winning that we're not winning
the war on cancer we're losing miserably
and um and that's because they're
they're chasing things that are
Downstream Epi phenomena so when you
what you know when they say a war like
Nixon in 1971 declared the war on cancer
in Wars we usually count casualties we
don't we don't say we've lost 35
soldiers per 100 000 population you know
we don't we we don't count it we count a
body count how many did you kill how
many are dying and and the body count in
cancer keeps going up every year so so
uh they're trying to say oh we're making
big big advances based based on the
number of cancer deaths in 19 and 1991
when they instituted the anti-smoking
campaigns so it looks like uh per
population cancer is going down only
because we're not smoking as much as we
used to but it's going up body count
goes up and especially for some cancers
like as I said breast cancer now has
replaced heart disease for women and
that should not be breast cancer can be
easily managed with metabolic therapy
but but no one's doing this
um there's no major hospitals or clinics
that are treating any form of cancer as
a metabolic disease and that has to
change we will not make any major
progress in managing cancer until it
becomes recognized as a metabolic
disease driven by fermentation
metabolism it's it's not that
complicated but you're right Katie they
make it look like it's an infinitely
complicated and they're giving us this
information Target this we have this
drug for your cancer answer that states
profound biological ignorance when you
hear people talk like that they seem to
be absolutely clueless as to the
biological underpinning of this disease
so it's really disheartening it's very
frustrating for me to hear all this and
the and the members of our society the
population
um they also they listen to these kinds
of things and they hear this
misinformation and then it becomes like
oh cancer is a complicated genetic
disease because the gene mutations are
all Downstream epiphana of course it's
going to appear complicated if you think
it's a genetic disease it's infinitely
complicated with no clear solution when
you look at it as a metabolic disease it
has a very clear manageable solution to
this problem so uh we know this and
we're trying to publish as many papers
documenting this
um I can't tell you how many people are
really doing remarkably well when they
avoid toxic chemicals and radiation and
they tackle this disease as a metabolic
disease the body
turns on this tumor cell and uses the
tumor cells to fuel the normal cells
it's unbelievable so but it's I have to
be honest with you doing metabolic
therapy is not a a walk in the park I
mean they're they're a lot of the uh
burden falls on the shoulders of the
patient so when the when people say oh
he's he or she are battling their cancer
today they're not battling anything
they're just sitting down getting
getting exposed to toxic therapies when
you do metabolic therapy you are in fact
taking charge you are you are the a
major uh a player in the management of
your cancer I mean it's calorie
restricted Foods the right kinds of
diets off Target drugs that work with
the diets together uh we published all
this we have documented evidence to
support this so this is the future it's
just I don't know when the field will
make this recognition and start to treat
cancer as a metabolic disease and the
patients don't have to demand this
because the poor patients go in and they
think the top medical schools Dana
Farber MD Anderson they think they know
what they're doing they do not know what
they are doing period
well and I love this approach because
when you say it's the burden on the
patient because the patient has to take
the action my listeners are probably
tired of hearing me say this by now I
say it so often but we are each our own
primary health care provider and while
we can work with amazing doctors at the
end of the day the responsibility lies
within each of us for our own health and
so to me this is actually very
encouraging news because you're saying
not only do we understand this in a
different way than a lot of people think
that we do but there are things very
much within each of our control that can
affect our outcomes here or even our
risk so I would definitely want to go
deep on Solutions but first can you walk
us through with the understanding of
cancer being a metabolic disease and not
a genetic one what are some of the root
causes that can lead up to it well this
is this is always an interesting I put a
big paper out showing all the the root
causes it's multiple okay
um very many different kinds of things
uh can can uh what so every one of these
kinds of things what we call provocative
agents uh they're they're all what we
call risk cancer risk factors what are
the what are the things that would put
you at risk uh for for getting cancer uh
okay
um uh chronic inflammation uh is one is
one risk factor so let's let's use an
example of a breast cancer for example
um a milk duct uh could become occluded
leading to an inflammatory micro
environment around the occlusion and
that chronically can damage uh the
respiration of a cell in that local
environment uh damage respiration uh
leads to compensatory fermentation and
this regular regulated cell growth so
chronic chronic inflammation
which could come as sleep apnea could
come from a lot of different different
reasons in in a particular population of
cells in a particular organ okay
um exposure to chemical carcinogens
um and that's why they call these
chemicals called carcinogens because
they have the potential to cause cancer
and how they cause cancer is again again
they damage the mitochondria in the cell
causing a failure in respiration leading
to compensatory fermentation and
dysregulated growth of those cells that
were chronically damaged by damaged by
the carcinogen we all know that
radiation exposure can damage
respiration leading to the form
formation of cancer that's why people
fear radiation because it has the
potential to cause cancer so that's
another risk factor age is a risk factor
the older we get the more chronic damage
that we we have to cells in our body
that lead to damage respiration
compensatory fermentation and
dysregulated cell growth then we have
these so-called oncogenic viruses like
papilloma virus hepatitis C virus these
are viruses that enter into a particular
population of cells chronically damage
the respiration leading to compensatory
fermentation and dysregulated cell
growth caused by the virus so the virus
is a risk factor then we have certain
genes in our body
and like the bracha one for example
which CR which is a risk factor for
producing breast cancer in some women
that might have that mutation so but
because it's not 100 penetrant meaning
that uh uh meaning that that that some
women can have the bracha one mutation
and never develop breast cancer
therefore the bracha one mutation is a
secondary risk factor just like a
chemical carcinogen just like uh
radiation just like uh inflammation so
you can you can have all of these
different kinds of provocative agents so
one woman may have breast cancer from
carcinogen exposure another one may have
breast cancer from chronic inflammation
another one may have breast cancer from
just being old
um so so all of these things another one
from Brad so all but they all have under
the microscope they all look like they
the cancer is the same but the origin
from these different cancers can be
quite different so how you prevent
cancer which is going to be the great
challenge because we know how to prevent
it you gotta keep your mitochondria
healthy and if you keep your
mitochondria healthy it's very hard to
get cancer
our our genes and our body are supremely
capable of preventing cancer you have to
realize that it's only been recently
within the last 70 or 80 years that
cancer has exploded on the on the scene
you know our primitive ancestors in fact
Aboriginal peoples from from uh on the
planet today Cancer is extremely rare in
our closest biological relative
chimpanzees they never had a documented
case of breast cancer and a female chimp
and yet they're they're uh 98 similar to
us in genetic and protein sequences so
why the chimpanzee female never gets
breast cancer and and breast cancer the
leading cause of death for women
you know so it's all because the chimp
is living in his diet and lifestyle that
he evolved to live in we have
dramatically changed our environment to
put us at risk for all these risk
factors that cause cancer so you keep
your mitochondria healthy and the
probability of getting cancer goes down
significantly so all this is easily
explainable once you understand the
biology of the disorder you're dealing
with the Trap the great monster tragedy
is that the majority of oncologists
working at the top medical schools are
clueless they don't they never heard of
any of this stuff that I've just told
you so as the result they go off to the
standard of care continually radiating
surgically mutilating this is a tragedy
I I can't believe that they would uh do
mastectomies on women when all of the
evidence show that they they play no
role in preventing the spread of the
cancer yet they continue to do all this
stuff so so
um it's a tragedy I consider it one of
the greatest tragedies in the history of
medicine uh this whole concept of of the
way we're treating cancer the way we
think the way the the the the system
thinks they understand it they don't
understand it and they're mistreating
these thousands and millions of people
throughout the world on this disease
foreign get to the situations of if a
person already has an unidentified
cancer I still want to talk a little bit
more about the preventative side
um and with the understanding that
everything you just explained that
there's a lot of apparent diet and
lifestyle factors that go into this it's
not a single cause by any means are
there some that emerge as a sort of
bigger needle movers that people can
focus on if they want to keep their
mitochondria healthy for the long term
yeah well I think that the the the best
way to do that is is do periodic fasting
or water only fast that's hard though
man I'd tell you it's not easy I I'm not
sitting here telling everyone hey go out
and stop eating have a try it's not easy
but ketogenic diets
um done nutritionally balanced ketogenic
diets like my my good friend Dom
diagostino he's always in ketosis
um he lives that kind of a lifestyle our
ancestors during the Paleolithic period
uh were always in a state of ketosis and
those cancers back was almost
non-existent in that in that part of our
our history our background
exercise clearly exercise
um eating the right Foods avoiding High
carbohydrate poorly nutritious Foods
this will all significantly reduce uh
cancer risk of course smoking and other
provocative agents minimize these as
much as possible if if possible but I I
would say the biggest periodic fasting
and exercise
uh in fact there was a big thing on NPR
today National Public Radio about how
powerful exercises
um you know and just reducing not only
type 2 diabetes but Cancer and a lot of
these all of these chronic diseases that
we are suffering cancer included are all
the result of diet lifestyle issues
um our genes are supremely designed to
protect us from cancer obesity and all
these kinds of things but when we put
ourselves in an environment a different
kind of an environment where we're
oftentimes
not moving we're very sedentary let's
put it this way driving cars sitting in
front of computers uh whatever you're
doing eating massive amounts of high
carbohydrate Foods we put ourselves at
risk not only for cancer but
cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes
they are all they're all piled on top of
each other
the the problem is no one wants to talk
about the real issue which is the
Highland lifestyle
and it's our diet and lifestyle that is
putting us at risk for cancer and all
these other diseases and you know you go
to the grocery store and you can see how
many foods are made from artificial
ingredients
um you know our ancestors had to work
very very hard to eat
um uh think about it if we're in the
Paleolithic period you had to run down a
big elephant or a deer or whatever it is
uh chop it up uh which is a lot of
energy and and cook it and
um there was no carbohydrates in our in
our diet we didn't have carbs they were
very rare and seasonal at best so we
were energy we were uh we're a species
that uses tremendous amounts of energy
we're supremely supremely geared to
store energy because we were always in a
semi-starved state so now all of a
sudden you take that same conditioned
body and now put it in an environment
where food is given to you through a
window you don't even you don't have to
get out of the car you just drive up and
they give it to you and you can eat it
well ever again right and then they
wonder where did I got cancer where did
I get type 2 diabetes it's not a mystery
anybody that has a a few functional
brain cells can can understand it's our
diet in the lifestyle I mean that's the
that's the origin of all these different
diseases so and and what we've done
instead of saying okay let me let me
know that it's my diet and lifestyle but
I don't want to change my diet lifestyle
that many many people in our society say
so we're going to take these drugs uh
that are going to try to do what are
changed in diet and lifestyle should be
doing and then we put oursel we take a
drug that seems to put a Band-Aid on
some aspect of our diabetes or whatever
we're going to do but we're not going to
change our diet lifestyle and hope that
the drug or the pill or whatever they're
giving us is going to make things all
right so we're also part of the blame
it's ourselves we're we're at a large
blame of this because because we don't
want to hear the fact that we have to
give up sugar and eat a little bit I
don't want to hear that I like my jelly
donut I like my coffee with all kinds of
sweeteners in it I don't want to give
that up okay then if you get cancer
don't be bitching and moaning about it
you know what you know what God you know
what gave it to you you gave it to
yourself
I know I hate to say that it is terrible
but but those are the true that's the
facts yeah well but this encouraging
side of that is that means there are
things within our daily control that can
have a very noticeable effect on our
risk of these things even once it seems
like from reading some of your research
even if someone already has cancer these
things can make a big difference and I
love that you brought up periodic water
fasting because this is something I
first learned about from you and I think
from Dr Pompa and I started doing
several years ago and not only did that
make a big difference in my labs because
I track those relatively regularly all
my inflammation markers are now very low
and within very healthy ranges it was
made it easier to lose weight and I know
people push back on water fasting
especially for women because of the
hormone implications I personally think
there are ways to do it in a way that's
still very healthy for your hormones but
are there any guidelines from what
you're seeing on how much how often
water fasting is just general guidelines
assuming someone doesn't have cancer
yeah well you know we developed the
glucose Ketone index calculator we
published the paper on that
um and we did it for the cancer patients
specifically glioblastoma brain cancer
because you know you can manage your
cancer quite effectively if you can keep
your blood sugar down and raise your
ketones
and water fasting lowers blood sugar and
elevates ketones I did not know at the
time that so many normal healthy people
would be using this glucose Ketone index
to keep themselves super healthy and uh
and competing with each other to see how
low they can get their gki a statement
of how anti-inflammatory their body is
and how super healthy their body is so I
I didn't know that but but apparently
there's a lot of people who don't have
cancer that are using the glucose Ketone
index as a way to maintain and and
quantify their their low blood sugar
because Ketone elevation of ketones is a
super fuel
um my my good late friend Dr Richard
Veach from the National Institutes of
Health uh and and another friend of mine
who passed away a few years ago uh
George Cahill uh head of the Joslin
Diabetes Center both of those guys told
me all of the power of the Ketone it's
in a super essential fuel keeps your
mitochondria super healthy
um so you can actually get more more
effective energy with fewer calories if
you're burning ketones and when you do
water only fasting blood sugar goes down
and ketones go up so you really
supercharge your mitochondria cleaning
out the reactive oxygen species the
damaging uh particles in the
mitochondria so you really get super
healthy that's why water only we evolved
to do that that's our background we
didn't we were not sitting in
supermarkets with bad food for our two
million years of existence on this
planet you know we were we were always
in a state of therapeutic ketosis that's
why cancer and all these differences
diseases were almost unheard of I mean
of course infections that's what killed
most of our acid had antibiotics and
things like this uh serious Falls you
know it's a tough life I mean when
you're not when you're not when you're
existing in a Paleolithic period but but
yeah so
um the glucose Ketone index calculator
which we published
um is being used to determine uh how
healthy people can be over periods of
time so if you decide to do water only
fasting usually take here's what we
found we found that jumping from a
regular diet into water only fasting is
extremely difficult it's like trying to
give up cocaine uh cigarettes nicotine
it's alcohol I mean it's if you're
addicted to something going cold turkey
is Pretty Tough so what we what we found
especially for the cancer patients we we
go first to a zero carb diet
um and it's not not that easy easy be
surprised how how carbon most of us are
but you go for seven days to ten days
you know you can eat eggs and meat and
you can eat some vegetables as long as
you don't have excessive carbs
um and then your body starts to adapt
and then you can jump into water only
fasting and the and the the the the uh
effect is much less stressful because
your body has already started to adapt
to this kind of a thing so you don't
have to go cold turkey into zero carbs
right away and then you can do that for
like uh a week and monitor your gki and
if you get your glucose Ketone index
down on the round of two to 2.0 1.0
where ketones and sugar are about
balanced in the blood you get super
super healthy
I mean but it's but a lot of people
don't know about that they don't know
how to go about it but that's the in my
mind that's the greatest way to prevent
cancer
cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes I
mean let's go run down the list of
chronic diseases that are crippling us
and you can get rid of most of those
doing uh um water only fasting or or
zero carb dieting and this kind of thing
and you have to do it and it doesn't
have to be so bad I mean some guys like
to eat eggs other guys like to eat these
Tomahawk rib eyes I mean I've spoken to
all kinds of people that eat all kinds
of things doesn't make any difference
what you're eating as long as you can
get your gki down to a lower people say
oh I eat listen I can't get it done well
don't eat that eat something else all of
a sudden oh yeah now I want to eat this
thing it goes down so good so that's how
flexible we are so it's it's not one
shoe fits one size fits all
yeah I think that tip of
going down in carbs first before
switching to straight water fasting is
helpful and maybe also for me it was
helpful to start with short water fast
like I think the first one I ever did
was only 24 hours and then now I begin
every year with a usually 10 day water
fast oh but I don't recommend starting
there obviously no no no no no your body
has to adapt it's like running a
marathon you just can't go out and try
to run 26 miles I mean you have to work
yourself into a into a preparation
so that's the same thing with water only
fat same thing with all this stuff your
body has to reaclimate and become
conditioned and get in shape to do these
kinds of things and once you can do that
you break make it part of your lifestyle
and but that doesn't mean you have to
deprive yourself of all the the joys
that we have but you just have to know
that okay I may have gone overboard on a
particular time of year but I certainly
know how to get back on track
so it's it's like it's like anything
and you mentioned glucose and glutamine
I believe as being the two things that
cancer cells feed on it makes sense that
a ketogenic diet and water fasting would
definitely address the glucose side of
that but what about the glutamine side
of that equation yeah the glutamine side
is a very interesting one we've known
for years and many many scientific
papers have been published knowing the
cancer cells uh need that glutamine and
we have now discovered that glutamine is
a fermentable fuel like glucose this is
our big thing so we're the first group
to identify glutamine as a fermentable
as a fermentable fuel so the two
together the glucose and the glutamine
now what's interesting is you can kill
uh I know patients who have survived
long-term cancer uh with calorie
restricted ketogenic diets and this kind
of thing without targeting the glutamine
we find that that in our pre-clinical
studies uh we can we can manage the
cancer much more powerfully and
effectively if we if we restrict uh
glucose with diet and then we use
off-target drugs uh to Target the
glutamine now I mean I I know people who
say well I'm doing water only fasting
and I'm going to do uh all this to get
rid of my cancer and it has been done
believe me I see patients that have
never taken glutamine targeting drugs
and they seem to be uh doing okay but I
but I think that we might be able to do
this much faster and much more
efficiently if we get the patient first
into nutritional ketosis with the
glucose Ketone index and as soon as they
hit that index then we hit them with low
dose non-toxic glutamine targeting drugs
to really finish off the surviving tumor
cells with no toxicity see my strategy
in managing cancer is getting rid of the
cancer in a relatively reasonable period
of time without any toxicity so when the
cancer patient emerges from the therapy
they are far healthier and more fit than
they than they were before they before
they had the cancer so I we're finding
uh some of these patients who have
cancer also have type 2 diabetes
cardiovascular disease high blood
pressure hypertension they have all
kinds of other problems besides having
malignant cancer so when we do our
metabolic therapy many of these patients
get rid of the diabetes they get rid of
the hypertension they get rid of the
cancer they get rid of all the things
that were troubling them it's
astonishing and all we're doing is
allowing the body to come back to its
natural state it's coming back it's very
hard to get the body to come back to its
natural state when you're being treated
with toxic poisons and radiation I mean
you tell name me any kind of a person
who would want to get healthy by taking
toxic chemotherapy and radiation it's
absurd you don't get healthy taking that
stuff so you get healthy by bringing the
body back to its natural state in a
well-formulated way and that's called
metabolic therapy and it can work just
as well for cancer as it can work for a
lot of other chronic diseases as a
matter of fact virta health is a way to
bring a cure type 2 diabetes without
drugs and this kind of thing but that's
not advertised on television
what's advertised on television are
drugs drugs drugs drugs and this gives a
lot of misinformation to people thinking
that oh I have this terrible malignancy
all I have to do is take this one drug
and it'll go away uh wrong A lot of
times those drugs will kill you they
don't talk oh yeah uh on on the some of
the immunotherapies for cancer they give
you a whole Litany of things that can
that can cause problems and in fact kill
you so why would anyone want to take any
drug or treatment that has a remote
possibility of killing you yeah yeah
they get all this and they go to the
hospitals and they get these drugs and
they call hyper Progressive disease it's
really nobody talks we all know about it
but it's not discussed that the drug
that they treat you with could actually
kill you faster than the disease
um and and it's not insignificant they
always say oh it's a rare side of no no
no 20 20 is not a rare thing you have a
20 chance of being killed by the therapy
they're giving you and they don't like
to talk about that so
um so you know we're looking at this and
and this is the this is the greatest
problem I think and it's very you're
talking about a metabolic therapy
that can manage a whole range of chronic
diseases in other words a multi-billion
dollar industry of of managing all these
chronic diseases with expensive drugs
and procedures well you don't really
need to do that
um but you have to be aware of how what
you need to do and how to do it and
that's the kind of educational mission
that can really help a lot of people
yeah because I mean I don't think
anybody's probably ever had a pleasant
lovely experience with chemo and
radiation but it seems like often people
think that is their only option and I've
heard people even say that you know like
that they think that's their best chance
of feeding the cancer yeah well this is
the problem when you go to the oncology
uh Center and you said like metabolic
therapy the first thing you hear is that
doesn't work there's no there's no
clinical trials on that if that worked I
would have heard about it you know and
this kind of uh nonsense nonsense and
and it's just people trying to protect
their Turf
um and there's no no Financial incentive
uh to do this
um you know unfortunately I keep telling
people that it's it's it's not a revenue
generating process and uh you just want
to you just want to kill cancer cells
without toxicity and they and they say
well there's no clinical trials but
there's hundreds of case reports and
anecdotal effects so then you have to
say why would there be no clinical trial
and what happens now I have some friends
that are doing clinical trials only
after the patient fails radiation and
chemo so you take the patient give them
radiation and chemo and the tumor occurs
oh we get recurrence especially for
glioblastoma brain cancer it always
recurs and now we're going to do
metabolic therapy I said no no no no you
do the metabolic therapy first why why
where is the group of people doing
metabolic therapy without radiation and
chemo oh that's we can't do that it's
unethical I'll tell you what's unethical
is treating patients with radiation and
chemo that's unethical in fact for brain
cancer I call it malpractice it is
malpractice to treat someone with a
glioblastoma with radiation and chemo
why because I publish papers showing how
that therapy accelerates the recurrence
and demise of the patient I publish
clear evidence for this so I would call
that malpractice it's on that it's
unethical to be treating cancer patients
brain cancer patients with radiation and
chemo it's terrible for me it's terrible
for the patient patients need to know
this so this is uh this is a a really
important a really important sure
and one of the reasons I was so excited
to get to chat with you about this today
um it seems like for a lot of people who
are afraid to try the metabolic route
first from what I've read of your work
even if they're still going to do chemo
and radiation doing these things
alongside it can still be helpful is
that right yes that's right as a matter
of fact what we're finding from our
colleagues in Turkey is that the amount
of toxic drug that you need to give the
patient can be reduced significantly so
so
um uh the drugs can have therapeutic
benefit if they're given when the
patient is in therapeutic ketosis we're
finding that out as a matter of fact
we're finding that yeah so so there's a
there is a possible hybrid or transition
period where I'm not so sure about all
kinds even with radiation I just don't
want to use it for brain cancer I think
it's outrage I think it's malpracticed
to be a rating anybody with a brain
tumor but there's other some other
cancers that a small dose radiation
together with ketogenic metabolic
therapy can have benefit and and you
don't have the toxic effects
um and we know from the work of Longo
and others that people who do water only
fasting they have far less toxic effects
from chemo but what we're finding is
that the dosage of the chemo can be
significantly reduced when patients are
in therapeutic ketosis so so not and
then so you get the benefit potential
benefit but I'm I'm saying to myself to
what we're saying oh yeah you can do
that but but we can also Target glucose
and glutamine even less even far less
more toxic without using those toxic
chemical drugs
um using off-target medications with
with this whole process so you know I
know that it's hard for for the whole
system to jump from one treatment
modality to another it's too radical
it's too radical
um so they have to do this hybrid thing
for a while until they come to
understand completely what I'm saying
and then in so many years they'll be
doing exactly or very similar to what
I'm telling you right now we don't need
any of this time these toxic drugs you
know we we can get these off-target
drugs but you think about the effect
that that would have on a on an entire
industry you know it's not it's not
something a lot of people is going to
are going to embrace anytime too except
the patient
who benefits most from this the
oncologist or the patients you have to
look at it that way right
yeah and it seems like the patient
should absolutely have the access and
the option at least to try these things
which is I think the option absolutely I
I know for in France now they're they're
they're having a system where the where
the oncologists are now having to tell
the patients that there are other
options to what we're doing here that's
not allowed in this country we don't
tell the patients that there is another
old except unless you whisper it in
their ear when you're going out the door
I I know this has happened but why
should somebody have to whisper an
alternative effect of therapy not not
boasting about it you know they have to
whisper for fear that they might be
ostracized or lose their license to
practice medicine this is nuts this is
not this is not right
um if you're able to say what are some
of the medications that can Target the
glutamine side or that can be used that
are not currently being used in the
mainstream treatment yeah well um this
is under active uh development right now
in the pharmaceutical Industries they're
all looking for a new new kind of drug
the best drug we found right now is six
deoxy nor leucine
Don d-o-n
which is the drug it was used on little
kids with leukemia the problem the
problem with that with that drug in the
past it was used in high doses without
targeting glucose or glutamine um it was
used as a glutamine inhibitor in high
doses not putting the patient in
therapeutic ketosis so they said it was
too toxic and and what yeah anything can
be toxic if you don't use it in the
right way but when you use it the right
way it becomes like a novel drug so we
found a way to reduce the toxicity of
that drug uh massively by by putting the
Patient First in a state of therapeutic
ketosis and we see in the pre-clinical
system it's showing great great therapy
um and it's a press pulse again if you
if you target glutamine too aggressively
you could harm your immune system
um so you have to know the biology of
what you're doing so press pulse
metabolic therapy is where you can use
diet to press the tumor into it into a
very reduced stayed less aggressive less
angry more indolent indolent and then
you go after the tumor with low doses of
these glutamine inhibitors for only a
short period of time you don't keep it
on the patient you don't give it to them
every day like you would do a regular
chemo This Is A New Concept called press
pulse metabolic therapy which we
developed here at Boston College so in
my clinician friends and I we put it all
together
um but but it's a way to degrade the
tumor Slowly by hitting them hitting
them hard with the diets with the water
only fast in the diets and then you use
small doses of these glutamine
Inhibitors and that takes care of the
tumor and the person the patient will
emerge in a very healthy State without
losing hair having all these adverse
effects that you have from the current
standards of care so it's a strategy we
published it all
um nobody can use it though it's not
part of standard of care they oh we have
no clinical trials on this well why not
why not uh well who's going to pay for a
clinical trial a big drug company that
could well I mean where they going to
generate revenue from a metabolic
therapy that doesn't generate Revenue so
you can see the the it's and Let's
ignore it let's not talk about it so uh
and I'm talking about it I'm I'm uh uh
educating the population that there are
things in there and if you do it the
right way then you say well none of our
oncologists are trained to do that well
why don't you get the training it's not
that hard you know uh well we never had
that in medical school there was never
any discussion about it well you you're
supposed to be a smart guy you should be
able to sit down and read the papers and
then apply that well they won't allow me
to do that because it's not I could lose
my license well why don't we change the
system then change the system so that
you can do it change this IRB the
institutional review boards they need to
know about this and if they deny the
patient and tell the patient this is
then they're com they're committing uh
uh malpractice and and doing that so I
think it has to change otherwise and the
other thing that why we're not making
the progress send this cancer everybody
thinks their cancer is different from
everybody else's cancer so you have the
Susan Coleman thing with the breast
cancer and then you got the lung cancer
group and then you got the bladder
cancer group and the brain cancer group
these guys are all the same cancer they
all they all work on glucose and
glutamine where is the public outrage
where is the public concern about this
there's no March on Washington there's
no outrage to your politicians there's
none of this stuff so status quo status
quo cancer deaths continual suffering
continual human demise it's just a
tragedy of monumental proportions that
no one seems to be concerned enough to
do anything about period
yeah which brings us back to
unfortunately or fortunately each of us
are our own primary health care provider
and unfortunately until these things
become standard of care it's going to be
often up to the patient to navigate this
and figure out their own options if they
are faced with something like cancer are
there any places in the world that make
these this this version more available
like is there anywhere people can go and
work with doctors who understand this
approach well very few I mean we're in
the process of training uh and believe
me many many Physicians are they want to
help their patients I mean this is why
they got into the field right they want
to help their patients and many of them
feel yoked and restricted from doing
this so so
um we're trying at small clinics the
last places to be honest with you the
last place
to do this kind of stuff we'll be at
your top medical schools
MD Anderson may be the very last place
to do it it's terrible to say that isn't
it Sloan Kettering MD Anderson Dana
Farber Moffat cancer I mean the last
place you're going to get people to do
metabolic therapy is at the top medical
schools
um but the smaller clinics uh may open
up where where some of the knowledgeable
Physicians
um could say okay I've had enough I want
my patient wants metabolic therapy I'm
going to do everything to physically
listen if I had cancer I know and I
wrote the books and I wrote all this
stuff I would like to talk to some of my
colleagues uh like any like any patient
would like to talk to their health care
provider you know am I doing the right
thing what do you think you know oh yeah
you know where feedback feed forward and
um yeah good point you know because you
like to talk to somebody that seems to
know about it and and even though I know
all this stuff I still want to talk to
me
my good colleague who runs a a service
to help cancer pay she wrote the book
keto for cancer very knowledgeable
person and we're getting more and more
of these kinds of folks that uh are
working with the with the human body
nutritional aspects to to work walk them
through talk to them when they're when
they feel like they're gonna uh that
it's not not working as fast as they
would like and and some of the comments
and some of the questions they may have
you like to answer their questions
um and this is not I mean it's just
human physiology it's just uh part of
the part of understanding your biology
and and the physician should know this
and help the patient walk through the
procedures yes it falls on your
shoulders but you need to fall and it's
good to have someone to speak to about
it you don't want to feel like geez am I
doing it the right way I don't know if I
should eat that or do this talk to
somebody about it that has the
experience to help the patient so it's a
it's a work in progress more and more
people are learning this and there will
be centers no question about it cancer
centers that will be able to help folks
either on site or through Zoom meetings
and things like this
and a few like clarifying questions I
just want to make sure I get through as
well we've talked a lot about the
glucose glutamine component of this are
there any cancers that do can survive on
ketones or on fatty acids or when
someone has made these shifts
we haven't found any okay and we've
we've interrogated them anytime you pull
a cancer cell away from all of its micro
environment
and grow them in the dish and then we we
take them and and here's what we do we
take these different cancer cells and we
put them in the dish
in the most minimal amount of material
and then we time them how long it takes
for them to die
um so we know and then we add things
back and see whether they can live on
this or that can they live on a fatty
acid can they live on a ketone and the
answer is we have never found one that
can do that the only thing when we add
back is glucose and glutamine they grow
like explode their growth explodes off
them I mean you can actually almost see
them getting bigger in the plate you
know I mean
um and you take away glucose and they
hang on with the glutamine you take away
glutamine and they hang on with the
glucose you put the two together and
they explode so um you know asparagine
is another amino acid that it gives them
it hangs them on a little bit longer but
they eventually croak but we have we
have never found any fatty acid or
Ketone body or anything like other than
glucose and glutamine that can keep
these guys alive when you when you bring
them down to the bed what are they what
are the basic things that these things
need to survive now when you put them
back in the body there's plenty of
glucose and glutamine unless you're
targeting so but and you're targeting if
you're taking it away and the other
beautiful thing about the body is that
our cells also uh like glucose
especially glucose so when you restrict
the glucose the normal cells start
taking more of it in and the tumor cell
absolutely has to have that it can't go
to the Ketone the normal cells can go to
the Ketone but they also love the
glucose so you're taking and starving
the tumor cell of the very fuel that it
likes because the normal cells also like
the same fuel but they're not totally
dependent on it because they can burn
the ketones and the tumor cell can't
it's a beautiful system it's an elegant
beautiful natural system killing tumor
cells you shouldn't have to lose hair
and have all those horrible things
happen to you
um but you know how long is it going to
take for the population and the medical
establishment to understand what I'm
saying I I don't know that's a that's a
that's a something we'll have to figure
out wait for
I mean you've certainly been out there
educating and making a huge effort to
try to get this information out for sure
is there any typical timeline when
someone starts addressing this as a
metabolic issue and addressing the
glucose and the glutamine sides on how
long that switch takes and like you said
the body is supremely capable of trying
to keep us healthy how long does that
process take when we actually understand
the body and work with it instead of
against it yeah well it depends on the
nature of the patient how old they are
how advanced the disease is you know
it's like anything that you would that
you would work on
um you know uh some people they let they
wait until this like the stage four you
know there's like two a week away from
hospice and then they come and say I
want to do metabolic therapy well I
think it might be too late at that time
but when you get first diagnosis is when
you is when you launch into this whole
thing
um there's a lot of opportunity to
really bring the body back into a meta
State a metabolic homeostasis
and gradually and gradually degrade the
tumor now there's a movie coming out
it's called the cancer Revolution and
it's produced by um Brad and Maggie
Smith and Maggie Maggie uh had breast
cancer uh that metastasized her brain
and um she was given only eight or eight
six or eight months to live
um she went on our metabolic therapy and
and completely managed her cancer she's
out many years now and her husband Brad
was a professional documentary filmmaker
so she told Brad Brad set up a movie
will you so Brad is put putting out the
first uh episodes I think it's a
six-part documentary series and it's
going to be coming out in the next month
or two the first part mostly on Otto
Warburg and then our stuff will slowly
come into play but you know it's cancer
is a metabolic disease and
um it all started with the book that I
wrote uh basically and Otto Warburg I
mean let's be honest he had it pegged a
long time ago but he didn't have all the
he didn't he didn't fill in all the
pieces we've done that we we filled in
most of the the missing parts of this
whole process so he didn't know about
glutamine he didn't know glutamine could
be fermented uh he didn't know about
ketogenic diets targeting glucose so he
didn't know a lot about the way you
manage it that's what we brought into
this whole thing so uh then it becomes a
real manageable uh kind of disease but
the movie will will illustrate a lot of
the historical linkages uh in a very
professional elegant way and I think the
population is going to be greatly
educated and informed uh about this and
then they have a whole bunch of
survivors of these stage four cancers uh
that also come on and tell you and
people well they're anecdotes but when
you get like dozens and dozens and
dozens of these anecdotes maybe there's
something real behind this it's not it's
not just anecdotal it could be the
general way to manage cancer effectively
so that'll be coming out I'll make sure
we link to that as well and at the end
of the day even if right now the
evidence is anecdotal if you are a
person who has cancer and it works for
you it doesn't matter if there are
double-blind clinical studies if it
works for you that's the outcome is all
that matters to you in that moment
absolutely yeah the long-term Survivor
doesn't care
um and Pablo Kelly our guy you might
have heard of Pablo he's the brain
cancer guy that that he's out now over
eight years and he came to me and he um
he didn't want any radiation okay he
said oh you're going to be dead in six
months if you don't do this well he
didn't do any radiation team or anything
just metabolic therapy and for me I'm
shocked that it worked as well now the
cancer is not cured it's there it just
it's an indolent now brain cancer that
kind is very aggressive and he's still
living eight over eight years one of our
uh I'm still working on this new case
we're going to publish it very soon on
dog dog cancer
um dogs unbelievable these dogs man they
uh their cancer can disappear with
metabolic things
I'm even shocked myself and I didn't
even Target the glutamine and it was so
we have mast cell tumors completely
resolved
um and and dogs with this kind of a
metabolic therapy so once people realize
that dogs can why why should these dogs
and they're also obese and they don't
get any exercise so so they're suffering
from the wolf never had these kinds of
Cancer all dogs are derived from Wolves
and the Wolf never had cancer and uh and
now we're getting these dogs that are
eating all kinds of vegetables and stuff
that are putting at risk too much
calories too many vegetables dogs should
never eat vegetables dogs shouldn't
don't eat vegetables and all the dogs
are getting cancer and all kinds of
problems and they they have the same
they're suffering just like just like we
are but we're going to take care of that
dog cancer real quick and then people
are going to say well what about me why
why
why can't you do that for me well we can
it's just that you got to know about it
it is kind of amazing it's actually a
man sometimes I'm amazed myself at this
whole thing I recently interviewed
someone who's looking at aging through
studies on house pets because they share
our environment so there's an
interesting correlation there and
similar things they were finding the
same things of like oh these metabolic
things also impact aging also impact
sleep also impact apparently everything
which makes total sense yes absolutely
it's just aging is the result of entropy
entropy is the second law of
Thermodynamics disorder we're all gonna
die we're we're programmed or to die we
we don't we're not programmed to live
for 400 years or anything like this all
all metabolic therapy does is delay
entropy it's just a delay of the
inevitable but you know you don't mind
living longer if your quality of life is
pretty good you don't want to be living
longer in uh demented in a nursing home
you know I mean this is not what I call
quality of life so uh you like to live
your normal life uh uh and be good up
until a day or two before you die and
and basically you can you can do that
with a metabolic approach I mean but
aging is another thing but I I don't
dwell too much on Aging because you know
I'm trying to keep cancer patients alive
just for longer than they're predicted
to be alive so that's what's our Focus
well a couple last questions although I
could talk to you all day because you
are fascinating we mentioned the bracket
Gene a couple times and I think it's
about almost three percent of women
carry these jeans and I think the
standard of care right now is double
mastectomies and hysterectomies
um and understanding everything we've
talked about my thought is it seems like
there has to be a better way even for
women who have these genes but what's
your take on women who have these
identified bracket genes well I think
those so they already have a documented
risk factor so we know the environment
can significantly reduce risk factors so
those folks would be the ones that would
most be most likely to get into
therapeutic ketosis following Dom
diagostino's uh program you know where
you're really you're really on kind of a
Paleolithic diet you have significant
exercise uh you're keeping your gki
glucose Ketone index in a low level
um you know and and I know the actress
Angelina Jolie made a big thing about
that but a lot of of those folks they
they need to stay fit and trim anyway to
get the roles they need in these movies
I don't know what they do but but um
they're ideally suited for metabolic
therapy I don't know why they would want
to be surgically mutilated uh for I mean
that's certainly an option uh but if if
you feel that's your only option you
don't want to you don't want to take
charge of your own uh glucose Ketone
index and
um and and if they do get cancer uh we
know how to manage it Target the glucose
and glutamine so so
um I would say that metabolic therapy
should be an option to
um radical uh Surgical mutilations
and I will make sure we link to more
information about the glucose Ketone
index calculator as well because I think
this is a helpful tool we can all have
to understand better what's going on
within our bodies and I'm sure we've
also sparked as many more questions as
we have given answers today because this
is such a complex topic so where can
people find you and learn more about all
these different things we've talked
about
well most of the um stuff that we do is
published Open Access journals so I have
many many podcasts
um uh in the so in the media uh my name
just Thomas Seyfried video
um uh and we also you can just go on
um
Publications just look my name up and a
lot of them are open access so that
means anyone in the in the population
can just go to the PubMed or or even on
web on the web and get the download the
papers press pulse therapy is downloaded
now I know there's technical terms in
there
um and I know as I said you have to have
a certain level of scientific literacy
uh because my I'm writing my papers for
the professional audience
um the scientists but I try to make it
understandable enough don't forget my
job is to teach undergraduates here at
Boston College so it's a real challenge
you know I have to take that technical
information and bring it down to a level
where where even the person is not
familiar with material can understand it
so so we we have that challenge in in
front of us
um but you know our our primary funding
comes from philanthropy and uh from
private foundations
um because there are people out there
who realize the power of what we're
saying and they know we're right based
on the scientific Publications and they
want to be part of it just for the sake
of saying I I want to be part of this
new movement
and the foundation for metabolic
therapies Travis christopherson's
Foundation many many people that I
contact me I don't charge any money for
any of the information that I that I
have I'm employed as a professor at
Boston College that's my job but people
can donate to our research through
private foundations and I I we get money
from private foundations what I do here
is I I do all the pre-clinical testing
on the best animal pre-clinical models
of cancer and then when we get something
really really spectacular I share the
information with the oncologists in our
in our group and then they would start
to put it on patients so it's a trickle
that was so and it's a feed forward
feedback because I get information from
the patients and then we just our
pre-clinical system to perfect it so
we're still in the dosha's timing and
scheduling Perfection and once we have
that down and that's it we're going to
know how to go about doing this really
well
um but pre-clinical studies cost money
and but we're we're doing it we're
getting it done I'm so grateful to uh
philanthropy uh I'll tell you it's just
wonderful you don't have to be writing
these NIH grants and having people who
who three people make a decision on
whether you know what you're doing or
not listen we know what we're doing we
know how to go about it and we're on the
we're on the as fast a track as you can
possibly have to get this disease behind
us and and we're doing that so yeah so
there's a lot of branches to this whole
thing uh we're working on all different
kinds of cancers got really good people
working in the lab smart knowledgeable
people got great Physicians out there
that want to apply it and more and more
people are hearing about it so as your
show your your podcast information more
and more people begin to hear about it
more and more podcasts and eventually
it'll be a Tipping Point and a
Grassroots movement to say we want
metabolic therapy for managing our
cancer tell me Doc what do I need to do
how do I do it that's it and we will
provide them with that information
it's tragic but it's also exciting I'm
very hopeful for the future I think the
future will will will be able to move
forward on this disease
and in the meantime you are giving
resources and education to people who
are willing to try this approach on
their own or alongside standard of care
which I think is really really
encouraging and I look back to that
thing I say so often which is that we're
each responsible for our own health and
I love that you shed light on these
misconceptions that are happening at a
such a wide scale within the cancer
world and put the power back in our own
hands even in a preventative way so like
I said I've followed your work for years
I'll link to a lot of the things I've
personally read in the show notes so
people can keep learning from you I also
know how busy you are and I'm so so
grateful for you taking the time to be
here and share today well thank you very
much Katie it was a real pleasure real
pleasure to be here thank you and thanks
as always to all of you for listening
and sharing your most valuable resources
your time your energy and your attention
with us today we're both so grateful
that you did and I hope that you will
join me again on the next episode of the
Wellness Mama podcast
[Music]
foreign